Appointments at Mayo Clinic
Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Abdominal pain
Definition
Causes
When to see a doctor
Causes
Abdominal pain can have many causes. The most common causes usually aren't serious, such as gas pains, indigestion or a pulled muscle. Other conditions may need medical attention right away.
The location and pattern of abdominal pain can provide important clues, but how long it lasts is especially useful when figuring out its cause.
Acute abdominal pain develops and often goes away over a few hours to a few days. Chronic abdominal pain may come and go. This type of pain may be present for weeks to months, or even years. Some chronic conditions cause progressive pain, which steadily gets worse over time.
Acute
Conditions that cause acute abdominal pain usually happen at the same time as other symptoms that develop over hours to days. Causes can range from minor conditions that go away without any treatment to serious medical emergencies, including:
Abdominal aortic aneurysm
Appendicitis — when the appendix becomes inflamed.
Cholangitis, which is inflammation of the bile duct.
Cholecystitis
Cystitis (irritation of the bladder)
Diabetic ketoacidosis (in which the body has high levels of blood acids called ketones)
Diverticulitis — or inflamed or infected pouches in the tissue lining the digestive tract.
Duodenitis, which is inflammation of the top part of the small intestine.
Ectopic pregnancy The fertilized egg implants and grows outside of the uterus, such as in a fallopian tube.
Fecal impaction, which is hardened stool that can't be passed.
Heart attack
Injury
Intestinal obstruction — when something blocks food or liquid from moving through the small or large intestine.
Intussusception (in children)
Kidney infection (also called pyelonephritis)
Kidney stones (Hard buildups of minerals and salt that form inside the kidneys.)
Liver abscess, a pus-filled pocket in the liver.
Mesenteric ischemia (decreased blood flow to the intestines)
Mesenteric lymphadenitis (swollen lymph nodes in the folds of membrane that hold the abdominal organs in place)
Mesenteric thrombosis, a blood clot in a vein carrying blood away from your intestines.
Pancreatitis
Pericarditis (inflammation of the tissue around the heart)
Peritonitis (infection of the abdominal lining)
Pleurisy (inflammation of the membrane surrounding the lungs)
Pneumonia
Pulmonary infarction, which is loss of blood flow to the lungs.
Ruptured spleen
Salpingitis, which is inflammation of the fallopian tubes.
Sclerosing mesenteritis
Shingles
Spleen infection
Splenic abscess, which is a pus-filled pocket in the spleen.
Torn colon.
Urinary tract infection (UTI)
Viral gastroenteritis (stomach flu)
Chronic (intermittent, or episodic)
The specific cause of chronic abdominal pain is often difficult to determine. Symptoms may range from mild to severe, coming and going but not necessarily getting worse over time. Conditions that may cause chronic abdominal pain include:
Angina (reduced blood flow to the heart)
Celiac disease
Endometriosis — when tissue that's similar to the tissue that lines the uterus grows outside the uterus.
Functional dyspepsia
Gallstones
Gastritis (inflammation of the stomach lining)
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
Hiatal hernia
Inguinal hernia (A condition in which tissue bulges through a weak spot in the muscles of the abdomen and can descend into the scrotum.)
Irritable bowel syndrome — a group of symptoms that affect the stomach and intestines.
Mittelschmerz (ovulation pain)
Ovarian cysts — fluid-filled sacs that form in or on the ovaries and aren't cancer.
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) — an infection of the female reproductive organs.
Peptic ulcer
Sickle cell anemia
Strained or pulled abdominal muscle.
Ulcerative colitis — a disease that causes ulcers and swelling called inflammation in the lining of the large intestine.
Progressive
Abdominal pain that steadily worsens over time is usually serious. This pain often leads to the development of other symptoms. Causes of progressive abdominal pain include:
Cancer
Crohn's disease — which causes tissues in the digestive tract to become inflamed.
Enlarged spleen (splenomegaly)
Gallbladder cancer
Hepatitis
Kidney cancer — cancer that starts in the kidneys.
Lead poisoning
Liver cancer — cancer that starts in the liver.
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Pancreatic cancer
Stomach cancer
Tubo-ovarian abscess, which is a pus-filled pocket involving a fallopian tube and an ovary.
Uremia (buildup of waste products in your blood)
Causes shown here are commonly associated with this symptom. Work with your doctor or other health care professional for an accurate diagnosis.
There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
Error Email field is required
Error Include a valid email address
We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices . You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.
Thank you for subscribing!
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Sorry something went wrong with your subscription
Please, try again in a couple of minutes
Definition
When to see a doctor
Share
Tweet
Penner RM, et al. Evaluation of the adult with abdominal pain. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed Feb. 20, 2023.
Acute and chronic abdominal pain in adults. Clinical Overview. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Feb. 20, 2023.
Cameron P, et al., eds. Approach to abdominal pain. In: Textbook of Adult Emergency Medicine. 5th ed. Elsevier; 2020. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Feb. 21, 2023.
AskMayoExpert. Chronic abdominal pain (adult). Mayo Clinic; 2022.
Abdominal pain, adult. Patient Education. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Feb. 22, 2023.
Products and Services
A Book: Mayo Clinic on Digestive Health
A Book: Mayo Clinic Guide to Pain Relief
See also
Abdominal aortic aneurysm
Acute liver failure
Addison's disease
Adrenal fatigue: What causes it?
Alcoholic hepatitis
Alpha-gal syndrome
Anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis: First aid
Aneurysms
Antibiotic-associated diarrhea
Aortic aneurysm
Aortic Aneurysms
Appendicitis
Ascariasis
#AskMayoMom Pediatric Urology
Barrett's esophagus
Barrett's Study Results
Behcet disease
Belching, intestinal gas, gas pains and bloating
Bile reflux
Biliary tract cancer: Should I get a second opinion?
Bladder stones
Blastocystis hominis
Blighted ovum: What causes it?
Botulism
Dr. Wallace Video
Dr. Mark Truty (surgery, MN) better outcomes with chemo
C. difficile infection
Calcium supplements: A risk factor for heart attack?
Carcinoid tumors
Cardiogenic shock
CAR-T Cell Therapy
Celiac disease
Chagas disease
Chlamydia trachomatis
Cholangiocarcinoma (bile duct cancer)
Cholecystitis
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Churg-Strauss syndrome
Colon cancer
Colon Cancer Family Registry
Colon cancer screening: At what age can you stop?
Colon cancer screening
Colon polyps
Colorectal Cancer
Constipation in children
Crohn's Crisis
Crohn's disease
Crohn's disease and the gut microbiome
What is Crohn's disease? A Mayo Clinic expert explains
Crohn's or Colitis
Cyclic vomiting syndrome
Delusional parasitosis
Dengue fever
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Diabetic neuropathy
Diabetic neuropathy and dietary supplements
Types of diabetic neuropathy
Diarrhea
Digestion: How long does it take?
Diverticulitis
E. coli
Early-onset colon cancer
Ectopic pregnancy
Egg allergy
Encopresis
Enlarged liver
Enlarged spleen (splenomegaly)
Eosinophilic esophagitis
Epididymitis
Esophagitis
Fibromuscular dysplasia
Flu Shot Prevents Heart Attack
Food allergy
Food allergy or intolerance?
Food poisoning (foodborne illness)
Fructose intolerance: Which foods to avoid?
Gallbladder cancer
Gallbladder cleanse: A 'natural' remedy for gallstones?
Gallbladder polyps: Can they be cancerous?
Gallstones
Gas and gas pains
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
GERD: Can certain medications make it worse?
GI Stents
Giardia infection (giardiasis)
Gonorrhea
Guide to different tick species and the diseases they carry
Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome
Headaches in children
Heart attack
Heart attack prevention: Should I avoid secondhand smoke?
Heart attack symptoms
Heart Attack Timing
Heartburn medicines and B-12 deficiency
Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS)
Henoch-Schonlein purpura
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Hives and angioedema
Hypercalcemia
Hyperglycemia in diabetes
Indigestion
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
Inflammatory bowel disease FAQs
Intervention: Help a loved one overcome addiction
Intestinal ischemia
Intestinal obstruction
Irritable bowel syndrome
Is a clinical trial for biliary tract cancer right for me?
Is there a special diet for Crohn's disease?
Ischemic colitis
Kawasaki disease
Kidney infection
Lactose intolerance
What causes laryngospasm?
Lead poisoning
Livedo reticularis: When is it a concern?
Liver cancer
Liver Cancer
What is liver cancer? An expert explains
Liver cancer FAQs
Liver cysts: A cause of stomach pain?
Liver disease
Liver Diseases
Liver hemangioma
Living better with Crohn's disease
Living with biliary tract cancer
Lymphoma
What is lymphoma? An expert explains
Lymphoma FAQs
Maintain your social life with Crohn's disease
Mayo Clinic Minute: Avoiding summer E. coli infection
Mayo Clinic Minute: What you need to know about polyps in your colon
Mayo Clinic Minute: What is an aneurysm?
Median arcuate ligament syndrome (MALS)
Mental health: Overcoming the stigma of mental illness
Mental health providers: Tips on finding one
Mental illness
Mesenteric lymphadenitis
Mesothelioma
Milk allergy
Miscarriage
Mittelschmerz
Mucus in stool: A concern?
Narrow stools: Should I be concerned?
Neuroblastoma
New Test for Preeclampsia
What is ulcerative colitis? A Mayo Clinic expert explains
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Norovirus infection
NSAIDs: Do they increase my risk of heart attack and stroke?
Opera Star's Surgery
Living with an ostomy
Ovarian cysts
Ovarian cysts and infertility: A connection?
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome
Palliative care for biliary tract cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Pancreatic Cancer
What is pancreatic cancer? A Mayo Clinic expert explains
Infographic: Pancreatic Cancer: Minimally Invasive Surgery
Pancreatic Cancer Survivor
Infographic: Pancreatic Cancers-Whipple
Pancreatic cysts
Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors
Infographic: Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors
Pancreatitis
Pelvic congestion syndrome
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)
Peritoneal carcinomatosis
Peritonitis
Pheochromocytoma
Pinworm infection
Placental abruption
Plague
Porphyria
Postpartum preeclampsia
Precision medicine: A new way to treat biliary cancers
Prednisone withdrawal: Why taper down slowly?
Preeclampsia
Primary biliary cholangitis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Proctitis
Pseudomembranous colitis
Researchers Develop New Stents for Complex Aortic Aneurysms
Ricin poisoning
Rotavirus
Ruptured spleen
Salmonella infection
Salt craving: A symptom of Addison's disease?
Scrotal masses
STD symptoms
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs)
Shellfish allergy
Shigella infection
Silent heart attack
Small vessel disease
Spastic colon: What does it mean?
Stage 4 (metastatic) colon cancer
Staying active with Crohn's disease
STD testing
Stool color: When to worry
Swallowing gum: Is it harmful?
Symptom Checker
Tapeworm infection
Testicular torsion
Tips for easing stress when you have Crohn's disease
Toxic hepatitis
Traveler's diarrhea
Treatment options for biliary tract cancer
Trichinosis
Triple X syndrome
Typhoid fever
Ulcerative colitis
Ulcerative colitis flare-ups: 5 tips to manage them
Undigested food in stool
Vasculitis
Vesicoureteral reflux
Cryotherapy
How irritable bowel syndrome affects you
Radiofrequency ablation
What is biliary tract cancer?
Where can I learn more about living with Crohn's disease?
Whipple's disease
White stool: Should I be concerned?
Wilms tumor
Fecal transplant treatment of C. difficile at Mayo Clinic
Mayo Clinic study reporting increased incidence of C. difficile infection
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Policy
Opportunities
Ad Choices
Mayo Clinic Press
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press .
NEW: Mayo Clinic Guide to Better Sleep
Listen to Health Matters Podcast
Mayo Clinic on Incontinence
The Essential Diabetes Book
FREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment
Mayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book
Symptoms
Abdominal pain
Basics
Causes
Fuel groundbreaking medical research!
Your donation powers the future of medicine and helps save lives.